---
layout: default
title: Data Management
parent: Users
nav_order: 1
---

# Data Management

Services based on Amazon's S3 protocol for object storage are
ubiquitous and have many advantages in terms of cost, scalability, and
use of use. Unfortunately in a distributed environment, they also have
a couple critical deficiencies: searching via stored metadata is
inefficient and there are no facilities for federating S3 services
from different providers.

The Nuvla data management model takes advantage of the positive
aspects of S3, while providing global management of metadata for
efficient search across providers.

## WORM Model

The data management model follows Write-Once, Read-Mostly (WORM)
semantics.  This model:

 - Optimizes read access to data, simplifying access to the data via
   the underlying services and improving performance.
   
 - Facilitates the replication of data objects, allowing "hot" data to
   be accessed efficiently on multiple providers.

 - Improves the reproducibility of data analyses by providing unique
   identifiers for "versions" of data objects.

Applications can also read data directly from other sources as
necessary. For example, an application can read streamed data directly
from a sensor, something common at the edge of the hybrid computing
platform.

Concretely, the implementation consists of three Nuvla resources:

 - `data-object`: This resource is a proxy for data stored in a
   bucket/object within S3 from a given provider.  This resource
   manages the lifecycle of an S3 object, allowing easy upload and
   download of the data.

 - `data-record`: This resource provides additional, user-specified
   metadata for an object.  This allows rich, domain-specific metadata
   to be attached to objects and consequently, precise searching for
   relevant data objects.

 - `data-set`: This resources defines *dynamic* collections of
   `data-object` and/or `data-record` resources via filters. These can
   be defined by administrators, managers, or users.

Together, these provide a flexible data management framework,
applicable to a wide range of use cases. The usual (simplified)
workflow consists of 1) creating a `data-object` (and implicitly the
S3 object), 2) optionally adding rich metadata in a `data-record`
object, and 3) finding (and using) the `data-object` resources
included in a `data-set`.

## Data-Object Resources

The `data-object` resource allows users to create S3 objects on
service providers and to store simple metadata concerning those
objects.

### Creating

The following diagram provides an overview of the workflow for
creating a `data-object` resource.

![Workflow to Create Data-Object Resource]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/docs/users/assets/data-object-create.png)

The workflow consists of the following steps:

1. Create data-object resource by providing bucket, object, and S3
   credential.

2. Request pre-signed upload URL via “upload” action.

3. Use pre-signed upload URL to upload object contents to S3.

4. Mark object as “ready” (and read-only) via the “ready” action.

Note that the bucket that will contain the data **must already
exist**. (Future versions will create the bucket automatically for
you.) The object will be created when you upload the data to S3.

### Reading

The data can be consumed by others via the "download" action only when
the object has been marked as "ready".  When the object is "ready" the
object data can no longer be modified.

![Workflow to Read Data-Object Resource]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/docs/users/assets/data-object-read.png)

The workflow consists of the following steps:

1. Request pre-signed download URL via the “download” action.

2. Use pre-signed download URL to download object contents from S3.

Note that only the pre-signed URL is generated by the Nuvla
server. The heavyweight access to the data itself passes directly
between the client and the provider's S3. This ensures that the data
transfer occurs uses the highest possible bandwidth.

### Deleting

The data object and underlying S3 object can be deleted. 

![Workflow to Delete Data-Object Resource]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/docs/users/assets/data-object-delete.png)

The workflow consists of the following steps:

1. Request to delete the data-object resource via the HTTP DELETE
   request.

2. Server verifies access and deletes object from S3.

3. Server also deletes the bucket if it is empty.

Once the object is deleted, it is no longer accessible either through
Nuvla or the underlying S3. 

### Managing Data-Object Resources with the API

**TDB**

## Data-Record Resources

Provides rich metadata for a `data-object`.

 - Provides an open schema to allow collaborations to provide their
   own metadata for data-object resources.

 - Simple filter syntax can use any defined attributes to refine
   queries over the stored objects.

 - Forced definition of prefixes avoids name conflicts between
   collaborations.

 - Recommended definition of keys provides semantic information for
   humans creating the metadata.

### Managing Data-Record Resources with the API

**TDB**

## Data-Set Resources

Provides dynamic grouping of “data-object” resources.

A data set definition contains filters for:

 - data-object resources,

 - data-record resources, and/or

 - linked applications.

Users can create their own data sets by filtering the existing objects
and share data set definitions with others.

### Managing Data-Set Resources with the API

**TDB**
